docs: add commit finder tutorial using Arrow library (#597)
oracle/macaron: docs/source/pages/tutorials/index.rst

You can use this policy in your GitHub Actions to prevent a deployment or fail a CI test during the
development. Alternatively, you can treat the result as a warning and manually investigate the
dependencies to make sure they are secure and can be trusted.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

> More Accurate Analysis via Mappings of Artifacts to Exact Commits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Analyzing and comparing different versions of an artifact
```

-----------------------------------------------------------------

> This tutorial demonstrates how Macaron can be used to determine the differences between one or more states of the single open source repository that produced one or more related artifacts. In this way, we show how a developer can be potentially mislead by supply chain security information that has been created for the current state of an artifact's source repository, rather than the version of the artifact they are actually using.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates how Macaron can be used to determine the differences between one or more states of the single open source repository that produced one or more related artifacts. In this way, we show how a developer can be potentially misled by supply chain security information that has been created for the current state of an artifact's source repository, rather than the version of the artifact they are actually using.
```

> The problem of mapping artifacts to the source code that built them is a challenging one, as most artifacts, even open source ones, do not provide a direct URL to their related repository. Services exist to make up for this lack, including Google's `Open Source Insights <https://deps.dev/>`_ tool that is in use by Macaron itself for this exact reason. However, without taking further steps, analysis of these repositories will reflect only the current state at the time of execution. One example of this is OpenSSF Scorecard, an automated tool that performs a number of a software security checks on a given project. These projects are typically provided in the form of a repository's public URL, which will be examined at its current state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The problem of mapping artifacts to the source code that built them is a challenging one, as most artifacts, even open source ones, do not provide a direct URL to their related repository. Services exist to make up for this lack, including Google's `Open Source Insights <https://deps.dev/>`_ tool that is in use by Macaron itself for this exact reason. However, without taking further steps, analysis of these repositories will reflect only the current state at the time of execution. One example of this is OpenSSF Scorecard, an automated tool that performs a number of software security checks on a given project. These projects are typically provided in the form of a repository's public URL, which will be examined at its current state.
```

> The problem of mapping artifacts to the source code that built them is a challenging one, as most artifacts, even open source ones, do not provide a direct URL to their related repository. Services exist to make up for this lack, including Google's `Open Source Insights <https://deps.dev/>`_ tool that is in use by Macaron itself for this exact reason. However, without taking further steps, analysis of these repositories will reflect only the current state at the time of execution. One example of this is OpenSSF Scorecard, an automated tool that performs a number of a software security checks on a given project. These projects are typically provided in the form of a repository's public URL, which will be examined at its current state.

Reviewer: It would be good to mention provenances as an alternative source of information to identify the commits, but unfortunately that requires adoption by open-source projects.

> To facilitate greater accuracy during analysis, Macaron allows a repository to be examined at more than just the current state through use of its Commit Finder feature. This feature performs a best effort attempt to map a given artifact to the exact commit that was used to create it by comparing.repository tags with artifact versions. Therefore, it has a requirement that any repository to be analyzed makes use of tags in a way that closely corresponds to the produced artifact's version numbers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To facilitate greater accuracy during analysis, Macaron allows a repository to be examined at more than just the current state through the use of its Commit Finder feature. This feature performs a best effort attempt to map a given artifact to the exact commit that was used to create it by comparing repository tags with artifact versions. Therefore, it has a requirement that any repository to be analyzed makes use of tags in a way that closely corresponds to the produced artifact's version numbers.
```

> To facilitate greater accuracy during analysis, Macaron allows a repository to be examined at more than just the current state through use of its Commit Finder feature. This feature performs a best effort attempt to map a given artifact to the exact commit that was used to create it by comparing.repository tags with artifact versions. Therefore, it has a requirement that any repository to be analyzed makes use of tags in a way that closely corresponds to the produced artifact's version numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To facilitate greater accuracy during analysis, Macaron allows analyzing an artifact and its corresponding repository state by using the Commit Finder feature. This feature performs a best effort attempt to map a given artifact to the exact commit that was used to create it by comparing repository tags with artifact versions. Therefore, it has a requirement that any repository to be analyzed makes use of tags in a way that closely corresponds to the produced artifact's version numbers.
```

> For this tutorial, we have chosen the Python library, `Arrow <https://github.com/arrow-py/arrow>`_. Arrow is designed to greatly improve the developer experience whenever times or dates are involved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this tutorial, we have chosen the Python library, `Arrow <https://github.com/arrow-py/arrow>`_. Arrow is a popular library designed to improve the developer experience for manipulating dates and times.
```

.. note:: Macaron also accepts a branch and digest alongside a repository URL for analyzing a specific state. By using a PURL we let Macaron determine these details itself, saving us the trouble of looking them up.

We will start by running the analysis on the latest version, ``1.3.0``, with the following command:

.. code-block:: shell

    ./run_macaron.sh analyze -purl pkg:pypi/arrow@1.3.0

The analysis involves Macaron downloading the contents of the target repository to the configured, or default, ``output`` folder. (See :ref:`Output Files Guide <output_files_guide>`). Once the analysis is complete, Macaron will produce a report in the form of a HTML file.

.. code-block:: shell

  open output/reports/pypi/arrow/arrow.html

.. note:: When analyzing multiple versions of the same artifact, keep in mind that Macaron will override the output report in subsequent runs.

.. _fig_arrow_1.3.0:

.. figure:: ../../_static/images/tutorial_arrow_1.3.0_report.png
   :alt: HTML report for ``arrow 1.3.0``
   :align: center

The image above shows the results of the checks for the `Arrow <https://github.com/arrow-py/arrow>`_ repository at the commit where version ``1.3.0`` was produced.

> In summary, the repository is:
> 
> * a Git repository (``mcn_version_control_system_1``)
> * using a build script (``mcn_build_script_1``)
> * using GitHub Actions to build using ``pip`` (``mcn_build_service_1``)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary the results show that we were able to collect the following evidence for this package:

* A commit at a Git repository that corresponds to the artifact (``mcn_version_control_system_1``)
* The build tool `pip` used in the build scripts (``mcn_build_script_1``)
* GitHub Actions workflow to build the package (``mcn_build_service_1``)
* GitHub Actions workflow to deploy and publish the package (``mcn_build_as_code_1``)
```

Before running the analysis again on the other version of Arrow, we should backup the report for future reference.

.. code-block:: shell

    cp output/reports/pypi/arrow/arrow.html output/reports/pypi/arrow/arrow_1.3.0.html

Now we are free to run the next analysis, and then open the new report.

.. code-block:: shell

    ./run_macaron.sh analyze -purl pkg:pypi/arrow@0.15.0
    open output/reports/pypi/arrow/arrow.html

> .. note:: When analyzing multiple versions of the same artifact, keep in mind that Macaron will override the output report in subsequent runs.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I think `artifact -> software component` better characterized how Macaron currently works.
```suggestion
.. note:: When analyzing multiple versions of the same software component, keep in mind that Macaron will override the output report in subsequent runs.
```

.. _fig_arrow_0.15.0:

.. figure:: ../../_static/images/tutorial_arrow_0.15.0_report.png
   :alt: HTML report for ``arrow 0.15.0``
   :align: center

> In the second report for Arrow, we can see that Macaron has returned slightly different results. The previous success of (``mcn_build_script_1``) has now changed to a failure, as the earlier version of the library does not include a GitHub action for building with ``pip``. In this way Macaron has demonstrated the usefulness of being able to analyze a repository at multiple stages, thereby allowing for a more accurate analysis when investigating artifacts that are, or use, outdated libraries.

Reviewer 2: I think it should be ``mcn_build_service_1``, not ``mcn_build_script_1``?

development. Alternatively, you can treat the result as a warning and manually investigate the
dependencies to make sure they are secure and can be trusted.

---------------------------------------------------------
Analyzing and comparing different versions of an artifact
---------------------------------------------------------

This tutorial demonstrates how Macaron can be used to determine the differences between one or more states of the single open source repository that produced one or more related artifacts. In this way, we show how a developer can be potentially misled by supply chain security information that has been created for the current state of an artifact's source repository, rather than the version of the artifact they are actually using.

> The problem of mapping artifacts to the source code that built them is a challenging one, as most artifacts, even open source ones, do not provide a direct URL to their related repository. Services exist to make up for this lack, including Google's `Open Source Insights <https://deps.dev/>`_ tool that is in use by Macaron itself for this exact reason. However, without taking further steps, analysis of these repositories will reflect only the current state at the time of execution. One example of this is OpenSSF Scorecard, an automated tool that performs a number of software security checks on a given project. These projects are typically provided in the form of a repository's public URL, which will be examined at its current state.

Reviewer: Please add a reference to Scorecard GitHub repo  and Witness (https://github.com/in-toto/witness). Also:

```suggestion
The problem of mapping artifacts to the source code that built them is a challenging one, as most artifacts, even open source ones, do not provide a direct URL to the related repository and commit. In principle, provenances, such as `SLSA`_ or `Witness`_, which contain the commit that was used to build the artifact provide the information that we need. However, currently the adoption rate in the open-source community is low, therefore limiting its value for this task.

Services exist to make up for this lack, including Google's `Open Source Insights <https://deps.dev/>`_ tool that is in use by Macaron itself for this exact reason. However, without taking further steps, analysis of these repositories will reflect only the current state at the time of execution. One example of this is OpenSSF Scorecard, an automated tool that performs a number of software security checks on a given project. These projects are typically provided in the form of a repository's public URL, which will be examined at its current state.
```

> To facilitate greater accuracy during analysis, Macaron allows analyzing an artifact and its corresponding repository state by using the Commit Finder feature. This feature performs a best effort attempt to map a given artifact to the exact commit that was used to create it by comparing repository tags with artifact versions. Therefore, it has a requirement that any repository to be analyzed makes use of tags in a way that closely corresponds to the produced artifact's version numbers. Pre-existing techniques that achieve the same as this feature do exist, namely `SLSA`_ or `Witness`_ provenances, which contain the commit that was used to build the artifact they represent. However, currently the adoption rate in the open-source community is quite low, therefore limiting its value for this task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To facilitate greater accuracy during analysis, Macaron allows analyzing an artifact and its corresponding repository state by using the Commit Finder feature. This feature performs a best effort attempt to map a given artifact to the exact commit that was used to create it by comparing repository tags with artifact versions. Therefore, it has a requirement that any repository to be analyzed makes use of tags in a way that closely corresponds to the produced artifact's version numbers.
```

*****************************
Run ``verify-policy`` command
*****************************

Another feature of Macaron is policy verification. This allows Macaron to report on whether a artifact meets the security requirements specified by the user. Policies are written using `Soufflé Datalog <https://souffle-lang.github.io/index.html>`_ , a language similar to SQL. Results collected by the ``analyze`` command can be checked via declarative queries in the created policy, which Macaron can then automatically check.

> The security requirement chosen for this tutorial reflects the difference between the two versions in the previous section. That is, we want to ensure that the artifact has a valid build service. If we refer back to :ref:`step <fig_arrow_0.15.0>` and :ref:`step <fig_arrow_1.3.0>`, we can see that the relevant check ID of the difference between the two versions is ``mcn_build_service_1``. To include this in a policy we create the following:

Reviewer: Looks like this comment is not addressed?

.. code-block:: c++

    #include "prelude.dl"

    Policy("has-build-service", component_id, "Require build with build scripts.") :-
        check_passed(component_id, "mcn_build_service_1").

    apply_policy_to("has-build-service", component_id) :-
        is_component(component_id, purl),
        match("pkg:pypi/arrow.*", purl).

> The second part of the above policy, ``apply_policy_to``, applies the policy to components found within Macaron's database based on the conditions within it. In this case, any component whose PURL begins with ``pkg:pypi/arrow``, thanks to the use of regular expression. This will capture both versions of the Arrow library used in the previous section. To use the completed policy, we save it to an easily accessible location, such as the directory Macaron is in, with a name such as ``has-build-service.dl``. With the policy file created and saved, we can have Macaron run is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The second part of the above policy, ``apply_policy_to``, applies the policy to components found within Macaron's database based on the conditions within it. In this case, any component whose PURL begins with ``pkg:pypi/arrow``, thanks to the use of regular expression. This will capture both versions of the Arrow library used in the previous section. To use the completed policy, we save it to an easily accessible location, such as the directory Macaron is in, with a name such as ``has-hosted-build.dl``. With the policy file created and saved, we can have Macaron run is as follows:
```

.. code-block:: shell

>   ./run_macaron.sh verify-policy --database ./output/macaron.db --file ./has-build-service.dl

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ./run_macaron.sh verify-policy --database ./output/macaron.db --file ./has-hosted-build.dl
```

At the end of the output of this command, Macaron will display the following:

.. code-block:: javascript

>     component_satisfies_policy
>         ['176', 'pkg:pypi/arrow@1.3.0', 'has-build-service']
>     component_violates_policy
>         ['177', 'pkg:pypi/arrow@0.15.0', 'has-build-service']
>     failed_policies
>         ['has-build-service']

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    passed_policies
    component_satisfies_policy
        ['1', 'pkg:pypi/arrow@1.3.0', 'has-hosted-build']
    failed_policies
        ['has-hosted-build']
    component_violates_policy
        ['2', 'pkg:pypi/arrow@0.15.0', 'has-hosted-build']    
```
